# Basic linux commands

- The Linux command line is a text interface to your computer. Often referred to as the shell, terminal, console, prompt.
- The command prompt is an executable CLI program, cmd.exe
- The default prompt ending with the dollar sign ('$') for regular users and


- a hash ('#') for the root or superuser.
    - '$' - Standard/normal user
    - '#' -  Root/Superuser
    - '~' - Home derectory

# User@Hostname Directory :~$

- User: The username of the user who is logged in
- Hostname: Hostname
- Directory: Folder where you are

## Commands-
- Commands are nothing but executable programs which perform specific task written in it.
- These executable programs can be called using their name as per provided syntax.

## Command	Purpose
- sudo -	Run as superuser (admin)
- su  -	Switch user (commonly to root)

## Basic commands
- pwd - Print working directory
- tty - Shows terminal type 
    -       (/dev/pts/0)
     -   dev - device file
    -  pts - virtual machine
    - 0 - first vitual teminal
- whoami
    - Shows: the current username you're logged in as.
- who am i
    - Shows: information about the login session, including:

- w 
    - Detail of all users
- tab tab
    - auto complete
- clear 
    - Clear the terminal screen
- history
    - shows all performed commands
- cal 
    - shows the calendar
- cal-3
    - shows the calendar for the next 3 months
- date
    - shows the current date and time
- date-s 
    - sets date and or time 
    - [yy/mm/dd : hh:mm:ss]

## System info commands

- hostnamectl 
    - shows detail information about system
- uname 
    - It display Operating System name
- uname -r
    - kernel release information
- uname -a
    It displays:
Kernel Version: This includes information about the kernel version running on the system.
Hostname: This displays the name of the system on the network (fully qualifiled).
Kernel Release: This provides the release number of the kernel.
Kernel Architecture: This indicates the system's architecture, such as x86_64 for 64-bit systems or i686 for 32-bit systems.
Operating System: This specifies the name of the operating system.